the defense health agency (dha) is a joint, integrated combat support agency that enables the u.s. army, u.s. navy, u.s. air force, and u.s. space force medical services to provide a medically ready force and ready medical force to combatant commands in both peacetime and wartime. the dha is in charge of integrating clinical and business operations across the mhs and facilitates the delivery of integrated and reasonably priced health care to mhs clients.
the dha’s global workforce of almost 140,000 civilians and military personnel provides medical services to tricare beneficiaries and their dependents.

history
the united states department of defense established the dha as part of a larger effort meant to reorganize its health care programs and services. the reorganization was based in part on the recommendations of a task force that issued a report on the management of u.s. military health care in 2011. under the old system, many aspects of military health care were managed by the individual armed services (army, navy, and air force).

structure
the dha operates under the authority and oversight of the assistant secretary of defense for health affairs. assistant secretary jonathan woodson, m.d., established the dha's organizational structure, including six directorates (see organization chart, right).

national capital region medical directorate
the national capital region medical directorate is a medical directorate within the dha.

education & training directorate
medical education and training campus
see: medical education and training campus § academics

list of directors
see also
assistant secretary of defense for health affairs
military health system
military medicine
surgeon general of the united states army
surgeon general of the united states navy
surgeon general of the united states air force
tricare
uniformed services university of the health sciences
us family health plan

references
external links
health.mil, official website of the military health system
defense health program account on usaspending.gov