the armed forces medical college (afmc) is a public medical school located in dhaka cantonment, dhaka, bangladesh. until 2008, it was affiliated with the university of dhaka. currently it is affiliated with bangladesh university of professionals.it is the only public medical school in the country under the ministry of defence. a major general of bangladesh army's medical corps is the commandant of the college.

history
the army medical corps (amc) of bangladesh armed forces requires induction of a good number of doctors every year. it has been observed that, newly graduated doctors from the existing medical colleges can't always fulfill the requirements of the armed forces. therefore, the government has decided to establish the afmc to meet the requirement of militarily motivated and qualitatively better medical graduates for induction in the armed forces, as well as to provide well disciplined and skilled doctors for the national health care service. the academic activities of the armed forces medical college commenced through the induction of medical cadets on 20 june 1999.

aims and objectives
the listed objectives of armed forces medical college are a combination of medical instruction, military discipline, and general information regarding the nation of bangladesh.

dormitories
afmc students viewed as 'medical cadets' and dormitory residency is compulsory. there are separate dormitories for male and female medical cadets located near the campus. the boys' dorm and the girls' dorm are identical in structure. after passing graduation, now-interns must move out of the dorms, however the option exists for outside living or an intern-only dormitory. the intern dorm is co-ed, however men and women are assigned separate sides of the building.

see also
army institute of business administration (army iba)
military institute of science & technology (mist)
army medical college, jessore
army medical college, chittagong
army medical college, bogra
army medical college, comilla
rangpur army medical college


== references ==