privolzhsky research medical university (research medical university of volga region, russian: приволжский исследовательский медицинский университет, old-name: nizhny novgorod state medical academy, nnsma) is one of the medical schools in the russian federation which is located in the city of nizhny novgorod.

organisation
as of 2014 the rector was  shakhov boris yevgenevich (russian шахов борис евгеньевич), d.sc.. there are 70 specialised departments with over 600 teaching staff. it has approximately 3000 students in 7 faculties which include:

faculty of medicine
faculty of pediatrics
faculty of pharmacy
faculty of medico-prophylaxis (preventive medicine)
faculty of stomatology (dentistry)
faculty of higher nursing education
faculty of preparatory courses (pre-medical courses)

faculty of foreign admissions
some of the foreign students study medicine completely in english medium, and some others study in russian language. however, students who study in english medium also have to study russian language to be able to communicate with local russian people who have very little knowledge of english, and thus being able to communicate with patients for basic clinical training.

faculty of medicine
most students have to undergo one year of preliminary course for one year, before continuing their undergraduate studies. general medicine program lasts after 6 years. upon graduation, the graduates are awarded a first professional degree which is the doctor of medicine or m.d. which is an m.b.b.s. equivalent because the graduates have been trained in the field of general surgery.

postgraduate programmes
postgraduate courses are also provided for both russian and international students. among the courses are internal medicine, pediatrics, radiology, general surgery, traumatology and orthopedics, cardiovascular surgery, infectious diseases, neurology, pediatric surgery, obstetric and gynaecology, epidemiology, hygiene, microbiology, orthodontics etc.

see also
education in russia


== references ==