first moscow state medical university (officially i.m. sechenov first moscow state medical university, informally sechenov university); russian: первый московский государственный медицинский университет имени и. м. сеченова) is the oldest medical university in russia, located in moscow.the university was founded in 1758 as medical faculty of imperial moscow university as the first medical school in russia. the institution separated from the moscow state university and became independent in 1930. the university was renamed after russian physiologist, ivan sechenov, in 1955. it was known as i.m. sechenov first moscow institute of medicine until 1990, and i.m. sechenov moscow medical academy from 1990 to 2010. msmu is located at devichye pole, a medical campus, in moscow.the university was ranked #651 in the world by qs world university rankings in 2021, #983 in best global universities by u.s. news & world report in 2022, and #1,001 in the world university rankings - times higher education in 2021.

history
the university was inaugurated as the imperial moscow university (moscow state university since 1917) in 1755. it is named after ivan sechenov, a doctoral graduate of moscow imperial, who is known as the "father of russian physiology." the institution became independent in 1930 and acquired full university status in 2010. it celebrated its 260th anniversary in 2018. the academy is a center for training, certification and further education for medical staff and pharmacists.

faculties
faculty of medicine
faculty of pharmacy
faculty of pediatrics
faculty of preventive medicine
faculty of dentistry
faculty of postgraduate professional training of physicians
preparatory department for international applicants
institute of professional education
center of master's programs

rankings
the university was ranked #651 in the world by qs world university rankings in 2021, #983 in best global universities by u.s. news & world report in 2022, and #1,001 in the world university rankings - times higher education in 2021.

notable alumni
alexei ivanovich abrikosov — pathologist and a member of the soviet academy of sciences
arkady arkanov - writer, doctor, playwright and stand-up comedian
oleg atkov — cardiologist and astronaut
evgeni babsky — physiologist and member of the ukrainian academy of sciences
jonas basanavičius — lithuanian physician, activist and proponent of the lithuanian national revival
leo bokeria — cardiac surgeon; academician; recipient of lenin prize, ussr state prize and russian state prize
sergey botkin — clinician, therapist, activist and one of the founders of modern russian medical science and education
anton chekhov — physician, playwright, and short-story writer
mikhail chumakov — microbiologist and virologist; helped develop the polio vaccine and organise its mass production
mikhail davydov — medical scientist, oncologist, surgeon; president of russian academy of medical sciences; recipient of state prize in science and technology
grigori gorin (grigori israilevich ofshtein) - playwright and writer
sergei korsakoff — neuropsychiatrist; europsychiatrist of the 19th century, known for his studies on the effects of alcoholism on the nervous system (korsakoff syndrome) and introduction of the concept of paranoia
anatoly kudryavitsky — russian-irish novelist and poet
shabsay moshkovsky — physician, infectious disease specialist, epidemiologist
alexander podrabinek - dissident, journalist, and commentator
vladimir serbsky — psychiatrist and one of the founders of forensic psychiatry in russia;  center of forensic psychiatry, serbsky center, was named after him
pyotr gannushkin — psychiatrist that developed one of the first theories of psychopathies (today known as personality disorders)
nikolay pirogov — scientist, medical doctor, inventor, pedagogue and member of the russian academy of sciences; considered to be the founder of field surgery and was one of the first surgeons in europe to use ether as an anaesthetic
ivan sechenov — neurophysiologist; moscow medical academy and institute of evolutionary physiology and biochemistry were named after him
nikolay sklifosovsky — surgeon, scientist and teacher
maxim konchalovsky — clinician; figure in russian internal medicine during first half of the 20th century
alexander myasnikov — physician, cardiologist, academician of the ussr academy of medical sciences
dimitri venediktov — deputy health minister of the ussr
valentin pokrovsky — epidemiologist; president of russian academy of medical sciences and director of the central research institute of epidemiology
valery shumakov — surgeon and transplantologist; a pioneer of artificial organ surgery; recipient of russian state's order of saint andrew
renat akchurin — cardiac surgeon; academician
rafiq tağı — azerbaijani short-story writer and journalist, graduated in cardiology
amiran revishvili — georgian cardiac surgeon and electrophysiologist, president of pan-russian scientific society of clinical electrophysiology, arrhythmology and cardiac pacing
boris yegorov — physician-astronaut who became the first physician to make a space flight

references
external links

official website
official website (in russian)
clinics of moscow university
international activity video