srirama chandra bhanja medical college and hospital is a public medical college in cuttack in the indian state of odisha, named after srirama chandra bhanja.
it is one of the oldest centers of medical teaching and training in india. it is located near mangalabag and ranihat area in the heart of the city cuttack with a sprawling campus of 101 acres (410,000 m2). it has been recognized by national medical commission (nmc). it is an undergraduate institution facilitating education and training in super specialty subjects under medical and surgical disciplines.in 2019 on platinum jubilee of scb medical the odisha cm announced the redevelopment and expansion of medical under 5t plan .the premier medical college will be redeveloped as an aiims-plus institution with 5,000 beds in two phases at an estimated investment of around rs 5000 crore.(scb mega redevelopment plan)

history
the evolution of this institution dates back to the beginning of the 19th century. it started as a small dispensary in the form of a first aid centre in the premises of the present medical college during the days of maharatha rule in the later half of the eighteenth century. the sole purpose of that dispensary was to render whatever little medical assistance was available and feasible to the sick pilgrims en route to and from puri, especially during the "car festival" of lord jagannath.
this dispensary continued to function admirably till the british occupation of orissa in 1803. the british rulers, in due course of time, realized the strategic importance of this dispensary at cuttack and converted it into small hospital. for the smooth management of the hospital, they made provisions for pumping adequate money from the "annachhatra fund".

in 1875, the orissa medical school was born by the effort of a madras (chennai) born scottish dr william day stewart, the then civil surgeon of cuttack as its first principal. he mooted out the idea of starting a medical school, utilizing this hospital as an infrastructural nucleus. in this endeavour, he received the kind support and sincere patronage of the then lt governor, sir richard temple and the divisional commissioner, mr. t.e ravenshaw. dr. william day stewart who took the initiative in setting up the medical and stewart school passed away on 23 november 1890 at the age 50 and was buried at the local 'gora kabar' cemetery.
initially the orissa medical school was established with a capacity of 20 l.m.p (licentiate medical practitioners) students. it was affiliated to the bihar and orissa medical examination board which granted the lmp diploma.
in 1944, the orissa medical school was renamed as orissa medical college and major a.t anderson, the then civil surgeon of cuttack acted as its first principal. he wanted to improve the orissa medical college as per the existing pattern in u.k which was highly appreciated by lt col. a. n. chopra, the then director of health and i.g, prisons. they recommended to the government to upgrade the existing medical school to the status of college. the parla ministry consisting of maharaja of paralakhemundi, maharaja krushna chandra gajapati dev, mr abdus subhan khan (minister of health and education) and pandit godabrish misra gave due attention to this issue and finally the orissa medical college was established on 1 june 1944 with a capacity of 22 students in the mbbs degree course.
the college was affiliated to utkal university and the first batch appeared in the final mbbs examination in 1948. the college received recognition for mbbs degree from medical council of india in the year 1952 with retrospective effect.
in 1951, the orissa medical college was subsequently renamed as sriram chandra bhanj medical college in recognition of the donation and efforts made by maharaja sriram chandra bhanj deo of mayurbhanj state. moreover, maharaja vikram deo verma of jeypore state, the founding father of andhra university also donated ₹1,30,000 to this medical college.the college received recognition for mbbs degree from national medical commission in 1952 with retrospective effect. postgraduate courses in m.d./m.s. specialties were started in 1960. since 1981, post-doctoral trainings leading to the award of d.m. and m.ch. degrees have been instituted in the disciplines of cardiology and neurosurgery respectively.

academics
scb medical college provides degree courses for mbbs, md, ms, dm, mch and various diploma courses. the intakes for mbbs course and the postgraduate courses are 250 and 150 respectively. a dental wing in the college campus imparts b.d.s. degrees. at present this college extends facility for postgraduate training in all the 21 broad specialties.
the college offers the four-and-a-half-year m.b.b.s. course with a one-year compulsory rotating internship in affiliated hospitals. there are 250 seats, all of which are filled through a single window all india medical test known as neet-ug. out of these 250 seats, 85% seats are reserved for state quota and rest 15% are for all india quota(aiq). admission in this course is extremely competitive.

the college offers more than 150 seats in post graduate courses. admissions in these courses are through the odisha post graduate medical examination (50%) and at the national level through the neet-pg.
national programmes like family welfare training in regional family welfare training centre, post partum programme attached to obstetrics & gynaecology department, icmr programme, ignou study center, regional spinal injury center and treatment of geriatric patients in geriatric opd are functioning in this institution.

ranking
sriram chandra bhanj deo medical college ranked 44 in india by the national institutional ranking framework medical ranking for 2022.

student life
undergraduate and post graduate students hail from all over india. the campus has five hostels including old gents hostel and new gents hostel for undergraduate men. it has one each hostel for undergraduate women, postgraduate women, postgraduate men, house staff students and nursing students.
both undergraduate (ug students' union) and post graduate students (junior doctor's association) have their respective unions. representatives of the student body are elected annually in a campus-wide election.
the inter-collegiate cultural, literary and sports festival of scb medical college is called synapse and is held between late december and early january every year. it is organized by the students union. in addition, the students' union holds various annual inter-class competitions where undergraduate students within scb medical college compete in cultural, literary and sporting events.
each hostel has a tv room and one reading room. the campus has many canteens for students as well as staff members. the campus also has a gymnasium for men and women and grounds for cricket, tennis and basketball. it has also a swimming pool for students.

library
a student library is inside the campus is equipped with more than 500 seats having sections for undergraduate and postgraduate students. the central library is one of the referral medical libraries in the state of odisha. it has been declared as a resource library in the eastern region by govt. of india in the year 1993.

medical facilities
the hospital provides services at its outpatient department, casualty and indoor services. it has a regional diagnostic center with mri and ct scans. it also has a blood bank and eye bank facility.

super specialty facilities
super specialty services of the hospital include the following:

opd
acharya harihar regional cancer centre
shishu bhavan for pediatric patients
regional spinal injury center
regional center for ophthalmology
regional center for tuberculosis
intermediate reference laboratory
cardiology center
antiretroviral therapy centera multi-specialty trauma center is under construction for special care of trauma patients.

telemedicine services
in 2001, telemedicine service has been established in, collaboration with isro and sanjay gandhi post graduate institute of medical sciences, lucknow for providing distant medical education to medical students, tele consultation for critically ill patients, follow-up treatment facility to the patient who are treated earlier and tele medical video conference are also being provided.


== references ==