the first pavlov state medical university of st. petersburg (russian: первый санкт-петербургский государственный медицинский университет имени академика и. п. павлова, пспбгму им. акад. и. п. павлова) is a medical school located in st. petersburg.

history
the pavlov first saint petersburg state medical university was founded in 1897 as the medical institute for women. the university has changed names several times since then: it became known as the first medical institute of leningrad in 1924. in 1936, the institute was renamed in honor of nobel prize winner ivan pavlov. in 1994, the institute was reorganized as a medical university.
in the 1930s, the institute of chemistry and pharmacy and the institute of pediatrics were spun off as independent institutions.

research
pavlov first saint petersburg state medical university houses a number of research institutes:

nephrology research institute
research institute of pulmonology
raisa gorbacheva memorial research institute of children's oncology, hematology and transplantation
maxillo-facial surgery and dentistry research institute
valdman institute of  pharmacology
heart and vascular research institute
regional research centre of neurobiology and psychopharmacology
scientific and methodological center for molecular medicine russian federation
centre of early phases of clinical trials

faculties
faculty of medicine
faculty of dentistry
faculty of sports medicine
faculty of adapted physical education
faculty of pediatrics
faculty of clinical psychology
faculty for international student
faculty of graduate education in nursing
institute of nursing
faculty of postgraduate education
faculty of pre-university course

notable alumni
pyotr anokhin (1898-1974), biologist and physiologist, author of theory of functional systems
natalia bekhtereva (1924-2008), neuroscientist and psychologist who developed neurophysiological approaches to psychology
marta helena nobel-oleinikoff (1881-1973), physician and philanthropist and member of the nobel family
alexander rosenbaum doctor, poet, composer, singer and actor
yelena bonner (1923-2011), human rights activist
vasily aksyonov (1932-2009), a writer of novels
ilya averbakh (1934-1986), film director, screenwriter
sofiya lisovskaia, russian urologist
tumani corrah, gambian clinician scientist researching tuberculosis, hiv, and malaria
olha kosach-kryvyniuk (1877-1945), ukrainian physician, writer, and translator
gulsum asfendiyarova (1880-1937), one of the first kazakh woman medical doctors(manto tshabalala-msimang, former heath minister of south africa

see also
list of higher education and academic institutions in saint petersburg

references
external links
official home page
medstudies