ganesh shankar vidyarthi memorial medical college (gsvmmc or gsvm medical college) is a public medical college in kanpur, uttar pradesh. the college is named after ganesh shankar vidyarthi, a freedom fighter and journalist from kanpur. it was founded in 1956.there is an annual intake of 250 students for the mbbs course, decided by an all-india common entrance examination: neet-ug.15% of seats come under the all-india quota and 85% of seats come under the state quota.
the institute has a lush green eco-friendly campus with big trees and well-spread gardens all over. gsvmmc has a sprawling campus with hospital & college sections accommodated in huge buildings.

the students here identify themselves as ganeshians and the alumni are called gems(gsvm ex medicos).

affiliated teaching hospitals and research institutes
lala lajpat rai hospital (llr hospital), which is also known as hallet hospital, is associated with gsvm, kanpur.
other associated hospitals are lps institute of cardiology, rawatpur, jk cancer institute, rawatpur, murari lal chest hospital rawatpur and atal bihari vajpayee postgraduate institute of neuro sciences. llr along with its sister hospitals forms one of the biggest patient care units of asia.

l.l.r. hospital, established in 1943, and has a total of 1235 hospital beds
children hospital, established in 1957
upper india sugar exchange maternity hospital, established in 1959
dina nath parvati bagla infectious disease hospital, established in 1949
dr. murari lal chest hospital, established in 1969
laxmipat singhania institute of cardiology, established in 1975.
juggilal kamlapat cancer institute, established in 1961.
g.s.v.m super speciality post graduate institute, established in 2021.

affiliations
at first the college was affiliated to university of lucknow. in the year 1968, it got affiliated to newly established kanpur university (now chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university). from 2021, this college is affiliated to the newly built medical university,  abvmu.

campus
the medical college campus comprises the following.

teaching and administrative block/main building
hostels1. boys hostel no. 1
2. boys hostel no. 2
3. boys hostel no. 3
4. boys hostel no. 4
5. boys hostel no. 5
6. u.g. girls hostel
7. p.g. girls hostel
8. new resident hostel
9. pharmacy hostel
10. samaj kalyan hostel

residential block, which includes:1. principal’s bungalow
2. p block- professors
3. r block- associate professors and professors
4. l block, type 4- all teachers
5. d block and type 3- teachers, medical officers, demonstrators and senior residents
6. c,t and block 2- class 3 staff
7. type 1 block- class 4 staff

maintenance block, which includes:1. staff club
2. post office
3. animal house
4. tennis court
5. swimming pool
6. sports ground
7. children school
8. college of nursing
9. badminton hall and gymnasium
10. dept. of electricity, water supply and sewage

gardens and grounds

2014 police incident
on 28 february 2014, samajwadi party mla from sisamau, irfan solanki, his driver and official gunner were involved in a minor accident with two doctors of gsvmmc.
the gunner allegedly assaulted the two junior doctors. as more doctors arrived, solanki and his gunner fled. later, a large group of samajwadi party hoodlums arrived and beat up many students. following the incident, heavy police force was deployed but was unable to control the growing tension from both sides.heavy police force, comprising pac and raf, rushed to the spot to control the situation by carrying out a heavy raid on gsvm hostels. the following morning, 1 march 2014, the late night raid carried out by police presented a sordid picture of police high-handedness and the pitched battle waged by junior doctors. besides violating personal rights and properties of many hostel residents, police destroyed windowpanes and door locks to get into the rooms of residents. the principal of college navneet kumar, who was trying to calm the situation down, was misbehaved and insulted. according to navneet kumar, among the students who were seriously injured, one of them suffered a pelvic fracture.as a reaction to the raid, gsvm and lala lajpat rai hospital went on an indefinite strike in protest against police atrocities. the strike was supported at six other medical colleges in the state. meanwhile, the ima announced that its members would remain on strike across the state on 2 march 2014 to protest police action. the strike at the gsvm hospital, called by the ima has crippled services in wards at the associated hallett hospital.

upgradation
in august 2014, the government of india decided to upgrade the institute along with six other medical college hospitals in uttar pradesh, as part of phase-3 of pradhan mantri swasthya suraksha yojana (pmssy) whereby the central government will bear 80% of the cost of up gradation and 20% cost will be borne by state government. the upgrading plan started with 12 other government medical college/institutions on 03.08.2016 at the cost of 200 crore (central share: rs. 120 crore, state share: rs. 80 crore) each under phase-iv of pradhan mantri swasthya suraksha yojana (pmssy).

notable alumni
khalid hameed, baron hameed, cbe dl is the chairman of alpha hospital group, and chairman and chief executive officer of the london international hospital, padma shri in 1992 and the padma bhushan, "third in the hierarchy of civilian awards", by the government of india in 2009
harsh vardhan -  minister of science and technology (india), ministry of environment, forest and climate change and ministry of earth sciences, former state minister of health in 1994 and chairperson of the executive board of the world health organization from may 22, 2020
satendra singh - noted disability rights activist and the first indian to win the prestigious henry viscardi achievement awards given to extraordinary leaders in the global disability community
ashutosh tewari, chairman of urology at the icahn school of medicine at mount sinai hospital in new york city
raj kumar, founding director of all india institute of medical sciences, rishikesh and former vc of uttar pradesh university of medical sciences
mohsin wali, padma shri

references
external links
official website