the longwood medical and academic area (also known as longwood medical area, lma, or simply longwood) is a medical campus in boston, massachusetts. flanking longwood avenue, lma is adjacent to the fenway–kenmore, audubon circle, and mission hill neighborhoods, as well as the town of brookline.it is most strongly associated with harvard medical school, the harvard t.h. chan school of public health, the harvard school of dental medicine, and other medical facilities such as harvard's teaching hospitals, but prominent non-harvard institutions are located there as well.  long known as a global center of research, institutions in the longwood medical area secured over $1.2 billion in nih funds alone, in fy 2018 which exceeds funding received by 44 states.

hospitals and research institutions
beth israel deaconess medical center
boston children's hospital
brigham and women's hospital
dana–farber cancer institute
joslin diabetes center
massachusetts mental health center
new england baptist hospital
wyss institute for biologically inspired engineering

schools and colleges
boston latin school
emmanuel college
harvard medical school
harvard school of dental medicine
harvard t.h. chan school of public health
massachusetts college of art and design
massachusetts college of pharmacy and health sciences
simmons university
wentworth institute of technology
boston university wheelock college of education & human development
winsor school

transportation
lma is served by two subway stations at opposite ends of longwood avenue:
"longwood" (on the mbta green line's "d" branch) and
"longwood medical area"  (on the "e" branch).
several public bus routes serve the area and commuter rail service is available at nearby ruggles station. masco offers shuttle buses (generally for affiliated personnel only) around the longwood medical area and between harvard's cambridge campus and the medical campus (m2). the m2 shuttle is free for passengers holding a harvard id.

energy
lma receives electrical power, cooling, and heating from a trigeneration (cchp) facility, the medical area total energy plant (matep).

lodging
bed and breakfast businesses
inn at longwood medical
longwood inn
the baldwin at longwood medical centre
yawkey family inn

references
external links

medical academic and scientific community organization
the diaries of john hull, mint-master and treasurer of the colony of massachusetts bay