mysore medical college and research institute (previously called mysore medical college, abbreviated mmc), also known as government medical college, mysore is one of the oldest medical colleges in india. it is located in the heart of the city of mysore adjacent to the city railway station. founded in 1924 by maharaja krishnaraja wadiyar iv, it is the first medical college to be established in the karnataka region and the seventh in india. the college is affiliated to the rajiv gandhi university of health sciences, jayanagar, bangalore.

history
maharaja krishnaraja wadiyar iv founded mysore medical college. since there were no medical institutions in the erstwhile kingdom of mysore, a scheme for giving medical education was started in 1881 under which carefully selected students were given scholarship and sent to places like madras and bombay to undergo training and to return and work as "hospital assistants".after the madras presidency expressed its inability to admit mysore state students, the government of mysore sanctioned another scheme in april 1917 including a "mysore medical school", which was started at bangalore to train the then called "sub assistant surgeons". trainees had to undergo a course for 4 years to qualify as a licensed medical practitioner (lmp). in 1924 the "mysore medical school" was upgraded and was now called the "mysore medical college". the college was affiliated to the university of mysore and the trainees were now granted medical degrees. mysore medical college was the first medical college in the state of mysore and only the seventh in india at this time. at the request and insistence of sri krishnadevaraja wodiyar the college was shifted from bangalore to mysore in 1930.
the foundation stone was laid in 1930 by sri krishnadevaraja wodiyar and the main building was constructed by boraiah basavaiah & sons, a famous contractor of mysore. it was further expanded in 1940.
the krishnarajendra hospital (k r hospital) was constructed at a cost of rs. 3,65,000/- and started as a 100 bedded hospital with x-ray apparatus. it is attached to the mysore medical college.
the mysore medical school continued functioning in bangalore for a few years and was eventually shut down two years after bangalore medical college came into existence in 1954.
cheluvamba hospital, earlier known as vanivilas hospital, was built in 1880 with 24 beds, and was upgraded to a 200-bed hospital in 1939. it was further expanded in 1954 and the new opd block of obg was built in 1997. new facilities have been continuously added onto the existing infrastructure, but the most impressive of all is the new multistoried opd building with its ultra-modern air-conditioned iccu which along with the medical wards on upper floors was added onto the k r hospital complex in 1998. other relatively new structures include a blood bank and a burns ward. it is attached to the mysore medical college.

admissions
undergraduate
the total intake is 150 for mbbs course. the seat is filled through the national eligibility cum entrance test conducted by the national testing agency, government of india.

postgraduate
it has intake of 127 seats for pg courses in which 50% is by all india quota.

attached hospitals
krishnarajendra (k.r) hospital, mysuru
cheluvamba hospital, mysuru
princess krishnajammanni tuberculosis and chest diseases (p.k.t.b & c.d) hospital
district hospital
epidemic diseases hospital
p. h. c. hoskote

list of deans and principals
dr. s. subba rao
dr. h.b. myalvagnam
dr. b.k. narayana rao
dr. j.f. robinson
dr. c. krishnaswamy rao
dr. b.t. krishnan
dr. y. appaji
dr. g.s. raghunatha rao
dr. b.n. lingaraju
dr. j.j. dharmaraj
dr. t. manickam
dr. lalitha lingaiah
dr. b.v. puttaraj urs
dr. v. ramachandra
dr. indira amla
dr. r.h.n. shen
dr. n.k. channappa
dr. d. chamaraj
dr. d. shankar raj
dr. d.c. parthasarathy
dr. a.m. krishne urs
dr. b. lakshmi bai
dr. r. seethalakshmi
dr. geetha k avadhani
dr. krishnamurthy
dr. radhamani
dr. nanjaraj
dr. dinesh h n
dr. dakshayani

references
external links

official website