assam medical college and hospital (amch), formerly berry white medical school, is a government medical school and hospital in dibrugarh, assam, india. it was the first medical college in assam and whole northeast india. it is the tertiary medical referral centre for upper assam and areas in neighbouring states, including arunachal pradesh.the college has been ranked 62 in the list of government institutes. it has been rated "aaa+" by the medical council of india with a score of 273.5.
the 450-acre (180 ha) college offers numerous facilities including indoor and outdoor sports facilities, canteens, atms, etc. the academic facilities include laboratories, libraries, wifi across the campus providing access to the internet facilities through pcs and laptops.
the college offers admission to 200 students each year from 2019. before 2019 it offered admission to 170 students each year.

history
the college was founded as berry white medical school in 1900 using a large donation from sir john berry white. it was renamed as assam medical college and hospital on 3 november 1947. 3 november is celebrated as foundation day every year by  students of the college. the assam government has preserved the original berry white medical school building in grahambazar, dibrugarh. in 1910 the college imported two x-ray machines from england, which were the first in india, and opened the country's first radiology department.
on 12 february 2016, union minister of health and family welfare laid the foundation of 192 bed super-special hospital with a 60-bed intensive care unit, a catheterization lab, and specialties in neurology, neurosurgery, cardiothoracic vascular surgery, nephrology and paediatrics.

courses
the college provides undergraduate and post-graduate education in:

community medicine
medicine
nursing
midwifery
pharmacy
orthopaedics
cardiology
otorhinolaryngology
general surgery
anatomy
pathology
biochemistry
ophthalmology
pediatrics
microbiology
obstetrics and gynaecology
psychiatry
dentistry
neurology
pharmacology
forensics
anesthesiology
dermatology
plastic surgery
radiology
physiotherapy

patient care
it runs outpatient departments in general medicine, general surgery, orthopaedics, ophthalmology, ent, head & neck surgery, dermatology, pulmonary medicine, geriatric medicine, obstetrics and gynaecology, dentistry, paediatrics, physiotherapy and psychiatry. special outpatient departments for rheumatology, diabetes, neurology, nephrology, cardiothoracic and vascular surgery, plastic surgery, paediatric surgery, urology, cardiology, neurosurgery runs on specified days of week. emergency services runs in casualty, paediatric medicine, obstetrics and psychiatry.

notable alumni
talimeren ao
rathin datta
upendra devkota
jitendra nath gohain
t. m. lotha
ashis roy

references
external links
official website archived 28 january 2012 at the wayback machine
college dunia