columbia asia is a  multinational chain of hospitals and one of the largest and fastest-growing healthcare companies in southeast asia. columbia asia started its operations in 1996, with the first hospital acquired a year later in sarawak, east malaysia. currently, it has 22 medical facilities across southeast asia: 14 in malaysia, 3 in vietnam, and 5 in indonesia.
in september 2019, a joint-venture partnership between malaysian-based conglomerate, hong leong group, and alternative asset firm, tpg had acquired most of columbia asia assets in southeast asia which include malaysia, vietnam, and indonesia with a total of 19 medical facilities.targeting the fast-growing middle-income group, columbia asia offers medical services by setting up mid-sized hospitals in residential areas.the company is in the midst of expansion and upon completion of this phase, the company will have 14 facilities in malaysia, 3 facilities in vietnam, and 5 facilities in indonesia. in addition to the pipeline projects, expansion of the existing facilities is also planned to cater to the growing healthcare demand in the community.
columbia asia medical facilities provide comprehensive medical services such as general surgery, cardiology, neurology, pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology, orthopedics and trauma, oncology and internal medicine. these are supported by ancillary services that include an intensive care unit(icu) , neonatal care unit, physiotherapy, laboratory, pharmacy, and imaging.

current facilities
malaysia
columbia asia hospital – bukit jalil newest
columbia asia hospital – bukit jalil marks the 22nd establishment within the columbia asia group's network of hospitals. it serves the community in bukit jalil and surrounding residential areas, encompassing seri kembangan, serdang, oug, taman desa, sri petaling, and sungai besi in kuala lumpur.
the hospital is a seven story building situated on expansive grounds spanning over 20,010 square meters. it contains 22 specialized clinics, 96 in-patient ward beds, five icu beds, three fully-equipped operating theaters, four labor rooms, ten nursery cots, and two special care nursery cots. the hospital also provides multi-story parking facilities.
the medical specialties offered encompass anesthesiology, ent, general surgery, internal medicine, obstetrics & gynecology, orthopedics, pediatrics, spine surgery, and radiology, including various clinical sub-specialties.
among its clinical facilities is a rehabilitation unit equipped with physiotherapy, speech therapy, and occupational therapy services, a health screening unit, an endoscopy unit, and a 24-hour service a&e unit, radiology and imaging services, a laboratory, and a pharmacy. the hospital has a 1.5 tesla mri, a 160-slice ct scan, and digital radiography equipment.

columbia asia hospital – klang
serving the residents in and around setia alam, bukit raja, bandar baru klang, kapar and pekan meru, columbia asia hospital – klang is a multi-disciplinary hospital that offers specialized services including cardiology, orthopedic, general surgery, internal medicine, pediatrics, and radiology.

columbia asia hospital – puchong
columbia asia hospital – puchong is a private hospital in puchong, selangor, malaysia. it opened in 2007 and cost rm55 million to build. the facility has 78 beds, 30 resident doctors, and 15 visiting consultants and serves a population of 300,000 people, from puchong and surrounding areas. the hospital also uses a proprietary software system for medical records, billing and queuing of patients.
the hospital opened in 2008 and cost rm70 million to build. the 82-bed facility has three operating theatres, a medical laboratory, radiological facilities and the computerized operating systems.

columbia asia hospital – seremban
columbia asia hospital – seremban is a private hospital in seremban, negeri sembilan,malaysia. the hospital opened in 1999 and now has 116 beds and offers outpatient and inpatient specialist services, a 24-hour clinic, and emergency services.

other hospitals
columbia asia hospital – tebrau johore
columbia asia hospital – petaling jaya selangor
columbia asia hospital – taiping perak
columbia asia hospital – miri sarawak
columbia asia hospital – bintulu sarawak
columbia asia hospital – bukit rimau selangor
columbia asia hospital – iskandar puteri johore
columbia asia hospital – setapak kuala lumpur
columbia asia hospital – cheras selangor
columbia asia extended care hospital – shah alam selangor

vietnam
columbia asia – gia dinh international hospital: the 20-bed facility was opened in 1998 in ho chi minh city's binh thanh district, and was the first 100% foreign-invested hospital in the country.
columbia asia international clinic – saigon, ho chi minh city: located in district 1.
columbia asia – binh duong international hospital, thuan an: the 100-bed facility was opened in 2012 and is the first 100% foreign-invested hospital in binh duong province.

indonesia
rumah sakit columbia asia – aksara medan newest
rumah sakit columbia asia – bsd tangerang newly acquired
rumah sakit columbia asia – pulomas, east jakarta
rumah sakit columbia asia – semarang central java
rumah sakit columbia asia – medan north sumatra

planned facilities
malaysia
batu kawan penang


== references ==