in bangladesh, a medical school is referred to as a medical college. allopathic related medical education  at the graduate level are provided by medical colleges. the colleges are under the jurisdiction of the ministry of health and family welfare (mohfw), and are affiliated with a university in the respective region. they however have to be recognized after meeting a set criterion by a central regulatory authority called bangladesh medical and dental council (bm&dc).
until 1986, all medical colleges were established by the government. since then, several private medical colleges have been set up. at present, in bangladesh 37 medical college is public and 72 are private medical college, there are also 12 dental college is public and 14 are private dental college.apart from these, 6 medical colleges are run by the bangladesh armed forces and are under the ministry of defence. as of 2021, government medical colleges offer 4350 seats for mbbs students, private medical colleges offer about 6040 seats, and army controlled medical colleges offer about 375 seats.
all the medical colleges award the bachelor of medicine, bachelor of surgery (mbbs). the doctor of medicine (md) or master of surgery (ms) is awarded as a postgraduate degree in selected medical colleges and universities, following the medical tradition of commonwealth countries. as per the declaration of overseas registration of the general medical council, the awarded mbbs degree from some of the institutions are eligible to apply for registration in the united kingdom.

public medical colleges
private
military
public medical universities
bangabandhu sheikh mujib medical university
chittagong medical university
rajshahi medical university
sylhet medical university
sheikh hasina medical university, khulna

see also
list of dental schools in bangladesh
bangladesh medical and dental council
list of universities in bangladesh
list of schools in bangladesh
list of colleges in bangladesh
list of institutes in bangladesh
textile schools in bangladesh
list of architecture schools in bangladesh
university grants commission (bangladesh)

references
external links
list of affiliated medical & dental colleges with university of dhaka
affiliated colleges & institutions with rajshahi medical university
affiliated colleges with chittagong medical university
affiliated colleges with sheikh hasina medical university, khulna
dgme approved public & private medical & dental college list
bm&dc approved medical & dental college