boston medical center (bmc) is a non-profit 514-bed academic medical center and safety-net hospital in the south end neighborhood of boston, massachusetts. as part of the boston medical center health system, the hospital provides primary and specialty care to residents of the greater boston area. it is also the principal teaching hospital of boston university chobanian & avedisian school of medicine and home to 66 residency and fellowship training programs.

history
boston city hospital was the first municipal hospital in the united states, opening in 1864. from 2015 through 2018, bmc undertook a campus redesign project to update clinical spaces, improve efficiencies, and better serve patients. this project included the closure of the newton pavilion and the relocation of the services previously in the building to other parts of the hospital campus.

patient care and programs
bmc offers care in four primary care practices (adult primary care, family medicine, pediatrics, and geriatrics) and more than 70 specialties and subspecialties, including seven areas that have been named us news high performers. as a level i trauma center, the hospital is the busiest center for trauma and emergency services in new england, and the 11th busiest emergency department in the u.s.

center for transgender medicine and surgery
in 2016, boston medical center became the first hospital in the northeast united states to open a transgender health center and the first hospital in massachusetts to offer gender reassignment surgery.

grayken center for addiction
in 2017, boston medical center announced that it had received a $25 million gift, the largest in its history and the largest gift for substance use disorders for any hospital, from eilene and john grayken. the donation created the grayken center for addiction medicine at bmc. in 2018, the grayken created an online resource library for employers to assist their employees impacted by addiction. in 2019, the grayken published a study about the "link between the marketing of opioids by pharmaceutical companies and overdose deaths."

roundhouse clinic
in february 2022, bmc opened a low barrier clinic for patients with mental illness and substance use disorders and "an observation and stabilization unit where patients could stay for up to 24 hours for management of substance-related symptoms" in the roundhouse hotel. part of the clinic's purpose was to decrease patient overflow in local emergency departments. the program was discontinued in the summer of 2023 due to a lack of funding.

brockton behavioral health center
on september 14, 2022, boston medical center unveiled a mental healthcare center in brockton, massachusetts. the 82-bed facility opened on october 1, 2022. the hospital was created to address a statewide mental health crisis.

curbside care mobile unit
in 2023, boston medical center partnered with the boston celtics to create a mobile care program for at home medical visits to new low-income mothers and babies in boston. patients enrolled in the program are visited by providers in a celtics-themed ambulance to perform medical care within the first six weeks postpartum. the program is "...fully funded for three years and will provide up to 2,100 patient visits a year."

rooftop farm
boston medical center has a rooftop farm, which grows produce for its patients and their food pantry program. in 2022, the farm was recognized by the white house. the farm yields some 5,600 pounds of produce each year. according to greenroofs, "the rooftop farm has 2,658 square feet of growing space and harvests about 25 different crops".

references
external links
boston medical center documentary by rachel gotbaum. wbur. 2006 audio documentary on the 10th anniversary of the merger, describing history and innovative programs of bmc. (realaudio)