jubilee mission medical college and research institute is a private, non-profit christian minority medical college, hospital and research institute located at thrissur in kerala, india. the establishment is administered by the jubilee mission hospital trust, a charitable organisation under the catholic archdiocese of thrissur.

history
jubilee mission hospital was established on 17 december 1951 as a small dispensary. in 1952, the hospital began its service with 4 rooms, 20 beds, 2 retired part-time doctors and 2 nurses of the holy cross congregation. under the leadership of dr h.s. adenwalla, the mission hospital grew to 1750 beds and is a major provider of health care services in kerala.nursing school commenced in 1966 and the hospital was recognised by the medical council of india (mci) in 1971 for internship training of doctors. training of post graduate medical students for the national board of examinations commenced in 1990. in 2003, the mci recognised the jubilee mission hospital as a teaching hospital. the institution subsequently opened the jubilee medical college and the jubilee school of nursing

overview
facilities
staff strength: 3,850
total beds: 1750 
total icu beds: 300
total operation theatres: 22 
total outpatients: 1,350,000 
total floor space: 1,295,000 ft² (120,250 m2)

campus
the campus is located at the heart of thrissur city and spans almost 25 acres. it has the main hospitals blocks, medical college, administrative wings, hostels, staff quarters, and engineering wings.
the campus also has facilities like libraries, reading rooms, museums, stadium, gym, table tennis hall and a chapel.
other amenities include atms, police outpost, post office, a branch of the south indian bank, various restaurants, cafes and a supermarket.
the institute also runs various various satellite centres throughout thrissur district.

phcs and outreach centres
the institute runs 5 phcs and satellite hospitals in and around thrissur 
st. antony's mission hospital, pazhuvil
mary immaculate mission hospital, engandiyur
padua mission hospital, puthenpeedika
rural health centre: mulayam
urban health centre: nadathara

achievements
jubilee medical college has been consistently ranked the top medical school in the state under kerala university of health sciences with regards to mbbs exam performance the hospital started one of the first human milk banks in the state, alongside general hospital ernakulam.the institute started the first interventional neurology cathlab in the district of thrissur.

departments
the hospital includes the following departments:

administrative departments
biomedical engineering
central library
medical records
medical education unit

clinical departments
anaesthesiology
anatomy
biochemistry
biostatistics
cardiology
cardiothoracic surgery
clinical psychology
critical care
dentistry
dermatology
dietetics
emergency medicine
endocrinology
forensic medicine & toxicology
gastroenterology
general surgery
head & neck surgery
immunohaematology
interventional cardiology
internal medicine
laboratory medicine
microbiology
microvascular surgery
neonatology
nephrology
neurology
neurosurgery
obstetrics & gynaecology
oncology
oncosurgery
ophthalmology
otorhinolaryngology (ent)
oral & maxillofacial surgery
pain medicine
pathology
paediatrics
paediatric surgery
pharmacology
physical medicine & rehabilitation
physiology
physiotherapy
plastic surgery
preventive & social medicine
psychiatry
pulmonology
radiology
rheumatology
sleep medicine
speech therapy
speech pathology
sports medicine
surgical oncology
urology
transfusion medicine
trauma & orthopaedic surgery
vascular surgery

specialised units & facilities
blood bank
burns unit
dialysis unit
geriatric home care service
human milk bank
hyperbaric oxygen therapy unit
interventional neurology cathlab
rntcp unit & dots centre
snakebite unit
small animal research laboratory

jubilee institute for tissue engineering research (jiter)
using regenerative medicine and tissue engineered skin substitutes to develop artificial skin that can replicate normal skin. unit has funding grants from the er & ipr directorate at drdo. the project is also under collaboration with college of veterinary and animal sciences, thrissur (part of the kerala veterinary and animal sciences university).

see also
list of medical colleges in india
list of largest hospital campuses
dr hs adenwalla
dr dm vasudevan

references
external links

official website