long island jewish medical center (lijmc or lij) is a clinical and academic hospital within the northwell health system. it is a 807-bed, non-profit tertiary care teaching hospital serving the greater new york metropolitan area. the 48-acre (19 ha) campus is 15 miles (24 km) east of manhattan, on the border of queens and nassau counties, in glen oaks, queens and lake success, new york, respectively.
lijmc has three components: long island jewish hospital, steven & alexandra cohen children's medical center of new york, and the zucker hillside hospital. long island jewish hospital is a 587-bed tertiary adult care hospital with advanced diagnostic and treatment technology, and modern facilities for medical, surgical, dental and obstetrical care.  as a primary teaching hospital for the zucker school of medicine (along with north shore university hospital) and the hofstra northwell school of nursing and physician assistant studies island campus for the albert einstein college of medicine, lijmc's graduate medical education program is one of the largest in new york state, and programs are in divisions headed by full-time faculty.

lij's full-time staff includes more than 500 physicians, who supervise care in all major specialties and participate in the medical center's teaching and research programs.
the medical center is located on the southeast side of north shore towers.
the center was founded in 1954 by a group of nine philanthropists, including jacob h. horwitz.

notable people
notable births
april 12, 1961: willi ninja; dancer and choreographer.
november 16, 1986: omar mateen; terrorist and perpetrator of the orlando nightclub shooting.

notable deaths
september 14, 1992: leon j. davis; polish-american labor leader who co-founded 1199seiu united healthcare workers east.
february 11, 1994; saul weprin; attorney and politician who was speaker of the new york state assembly.
november 13, 1998; red holzman; basketball player and coach.
june 25, 1999: fred trump; real estate developer and father of the 45th president of the united states, donald trump.

notable employees
sean kenniff; 4-year residency and chief resident
harold s. koplewicz; chief of child and adolescent psychiatry
dr. sandra lindsay dhsc, ms, mba, rn, ccrn-k, ne-bc; first person in the u.s. to get the covid-19 vaccine.

transportation
the mta's q46 bus stops inside the hospital. in addition, the qm5, qm6, qm8, qm35 and qm36 express buses to manhattan all stop near lij.

references


== external links ==