government medical college, kozhikode, also known as calicut medical college (cmc), is a school of medicine in kozhikode (formerly calicut) in the indian state of kerala. the college was established in 1957 as the second medical college in kerala. with over 3025 beds, it is currently the largest hospital in india and tenth largest in the world. it is also one of india's largest hospitals by area, covering more than 270 acres of land in the outskirts of kozhikode city. formerly affiliated to the university of calicut, the college is now attached to the kerala university of health sciences (kuhs). calicut medical college is the most preferred medical college of kerala during both all india as well as state counsellings for mbbs admission.

publication
it publishes the calicut medical journal. the institute of palliative medicine of kozhikode is part of it.

institutes
institute of maternal and child health
the institute of maternal and child health (imch) is a 1100 bed tertiary care center dedicated to maternal and child health care. the institute of maternal and child health of medical college is a regional diagnostic centre for primary immunodeficiency disorders. this collaborative centre provides clinical care as well as genetic diagnosis for patients with primary immunodeficiency disorders. this collaborative centre is part of the genomics for understanding rare diseases india alliance network (guardian) initiative.

institute of palliative medicine
the institute of palliative medicine (ipm) is a who collaborative centre for community participation in palliative care and long term care it was initially set up in 1993, as a pain relief clinic for terminal cancer patients, run by dr m. r. rajagopal and dr suresh kumar. today, it is the nodal institution for palliative care in kerala, providing training to doctors, nurses and volunteers. since the vast majority of india's palliative care sites - 841 out of 908 - are located in kerala, the institute of palliative medicine leads the largest palliative care network in india.

institute of mental health and neurosciences
the institute of mental health and neurosciences (imhans) is an autonomous institute under the government of kerala.

government women and children hospital, kozhikode
this was established in 1903 by raja sir savalai ramaswamy mudaliar and was handed over to the government on 22 september 1903

alumni
the calicut medical college alumni association was established in 2003. the association publishes the calicut medical journal, an online open access medical journal. the founding editor-in-chief was p.v. ramachandran, and the current editor is varghese thomas. the journal is indexed by cab international. it was established to provide local physicians an opportunity to report their research findings to an international audience.notable alumni include:

azad moopen, physician, padma shri (2011)
k. c. joseph, politician
khadija mumtaz, author
m. k. muneer, former minister (only for house surgency. mbbs course was done in a private college in bangalore)
p. k. sasidharan, doctor, author, social activist, educator
vinod scaria, indian biologist, medical researcher

see also
history of medical education in calicut
kovoor town
kuttikkattoor
devagiri
chevayur


== references ==