shaheed suhrawardy medical college (shsmc) is a public medical college and hospital located in dhaka, the capital city of bangladesh.
it is ranked third in the government medical college ranking after dmc & ssmc. it has been included in the world directory of medical schools.

history
shaheed suhrawardy hospital was established in 1963 as ayub central hospital in sher-e-bangla nagor, dhaka, bangladesh. the hospital building was designed by architect louis i kahn.
the bangladeshi government decided on 5 september 2005 to turn shaheed suhrawardy hospital into a medical college. educational activities in the college began on 6 may 2006. in the inauguration ceremony the then health minister, khandakar mosharof hossain started the educational activities officially. originally, the medical college was known as begum khaleda zia medical college and had 100 students. however, on 1 june 2009, the name of the medical college was changed to shaheed suhrawardy medical college.

campus
there are separate hostels for boys and girls. both the hostels were established and opened in june, 2008. both of the hostels are six storied & have catering services and hall rooms. canteen facilities are available with food items. the new college building has been inaugurated by prime minister sheikh hasina on 17 january 2012.
shaheed suhrawardy medical college is affiliated with the university of dhaka. 
this college is directly governed by bangladesh medical and dental council - an affiliate of the ministry of health.

academics
shaheed suhrawardy medical college is affiliated with the university of dhaka. the students receive an mbbs degree from the university of dhaka after completion of five years of study and passing the final professional examination. the students receive bds degree from the same university. this college is directly governed by bangladesh medical and dental council - an affiliate of the ministry of health.
admission test is held under the ministry of health for admission in all the government medical colleges. students selected in the test are admitted here on the basis of merit and choice.

principals
1st principal: a.k.m. azizul huq (2006-2008)
2nd principal: abdul kader khan (2008-2009)
3rd principal: abm muksudul alam (2009 – present)

student life
extracurricular activities
each and every year the students celebrate the national days by performing cultural programme. the students also celebrate the iftar party, swarasti puja, pahela baisakh, indoor games competition in the college campus.

voluntary organizations
sphuron
sandhani – shaheed suhrawardy medical college unit
shaheed suhrawardy medical college debating club
de beats
somaz sheba protishthan (bengali: সমাজ সেবা প্রতিষ্ঠান)

achievements
the students have attended the european students conference in 2011, 2012, 2013, the aims meeting, lisbon in 2012 and 2013, limsc conference, netherlands in 2011 and 2012 as research presenters, workshop participants and ambassadors. shsmch won first prize in the 'top medical college hospital' category published by dghs for the third consecutive time in 2019.

gallery
see also
list of medical colleges in bangladesh
sir salimullah medical college


== references ==