the following is a list of bishops of the catholic church in the united states, including puerto rico, guam, the northern marianas and samoa. 
the catholic church in the united states comprises:

176 latin church dioceses led by archbishops and bishops
18 eastern catholic eparchies led by eparchs
the archdiocese for the military services, usa, for american military personnel, led by an archbishop
the personal ordinariate of the chair of saint peter, a special diocese of anglican converts to catholicism.

archbishops and bishops
the 176 latin church dioceses in the united states are divided into 33 ecclesiastical provinces.  each province has a metropolitan archdiocese led by an archbishop, and at least one suffragan diocese.  each suffragan diocese is led by a bishop.  the archdiocese for the military services, usa is the only american archdiocese that is not designated as a metropolitan archdiocese. the pope appoints all archbishops and bishops, who must be at least ordained priests.  the pope chooses from a list of candidates provided by the papal nuncio of the united states to the congregation of bishops in rome.
most archdioceses and large dioceses have one or more auxiliary bishops, serving under the direction of the archbishop or bishop. the pope appoints all auxiliary bishops.
some archdioceses and dioceses have a coadjutor archbishop or coadjutor bishop.  the coadjutor assists an elderly or ailing archbishop or bishop with their administrative duties.  after the archbishop or bishop retires or dies, the coadjutor normally succeeds him without an appointment by the pope. the pope appoints all coadjutors.in some rare cases, the pope will name a titular archbishop as the bishop of a suffragan diocese. the most recent example in the united states was that of celestine damiano, whom pope john xxiii named as bishop of the diocese of camden in 1960.there are several dioceses in the american inhabited territories:  

in the commonwealth of puerto rico, the archbishop and five bishops form their own episcopal conference, the conferencia episcopal puertorriqueña.
in the commonwealth of the northern mariana islands, american samoa, and guam, the bishops belong to the episcopal conference of the pacific.all active and retired bishops and archbishops in the united states —diocesan, coadjutor, and auxiliary—are members of the united states conference of catholic bishops (usccb).

archparchs
the united states has two eastern catholic metropoliae, each led by a metropolitan archbishop called an archparch: 

in the ruthenian greek catholic church there is a single metropolis — the metropolis of pittsburgh
the four ukrainian catholic eparchies constitute the second metropolia. philadelphia is the metropolitan see.

cardinals
as of october 2022, the vatican has designated seven american metropolitan archbishops in the latin church as cardinals: 

seán o'malley – archdiocese of boston
blase cupich – archdiocese of chicago
daniel dinardo – archdiocese of galveston-houston
joseph tobin – archdiocese of newark
timothy dolan – archdiocese of new york
wilton gregory – archdiocese of washingtonone suffragan diocese is led by a cardinal:
robert w. mcelroy – diocese of san diego 
four american archdioceses have retired archbishops who served as cardinal-archbishops: 

adam maida – archdiocese of detroit
roger mahony – archdiocese of los angeles
justin rigali – archdiocese of philadelphia
donald wuerl – archdiocese of washingtonthree american archdioceses have former archbishops whom the vatican created as cardinals after they completed their tenures as diocesan archbishops: 

edwin o'brien – archdiocese of baltimore
james stafford – archdiocese of denver
raymond burke – archdiocese of st. louis

latin church archbishops and bishops
bishops emeriti
eastern catholic eparchs
metropolis of philadelphia for ukrainians
see: category:ukrainian catholic metropolia of philadelphiathe ukrainian catholic metropolitan province of philadelphia consists of four eparchies of the ukrainian greek catholic church, and covers the entire united states.

metropolis of pittsburgh for ruthenians
the metropolis of pittsburgh is a sui iuris metropolitan province of the ruthenian greek catholic church. the metropolis consists of four eparchies and covers the entire united states. it's geographic remit also includes the exarchate of toronto in canada. 
the metropolis has ecclesiastical jurisdiction over all ruthenian catholics in the united states, as well as other byzantine rite catholics without an established hierarchy in the country.

american eparchies that are immediately subject to the holy see
the other eastern catholic churches with eparchies (dioceses) or exarchates established in the united states are not grouped into metropoliae. all are immediately subject to the holy see, with limited oversight by the head of their respective sui iuris churches.

american-canadian eparchies that are immediately subject to the holy see
several eastern catholic churches have jurisdictions that include members and congregations in both the united states and canada.

list of eparchs and archeparch emeritus
personal ordinariate of the chair of saint peter
the personal ordinariate of the chair of saint peter is a special diocese comprising anglican converts to catholicism. under canon law, if the personal ordinary is not a bishop, he is treated as the equivalent of a diocesan bishop.

american bishops serving outside the united states
bishops serving in vatican city
raymond leo burke, patron emeritus of the sovereign military order of malta
joseph augustine di noia, o.p., adjunct secretary of the congregation for the doctrine of the faith
kevin joseph farrell, camerlengo of the holy roman church and prefect of the dicastery for the laity, family and life
james michael harvey, archpriest of the basilica of saint paul outside the walls
robert francis prevost, o.s.a., prefect of the dicastery for bishops.

bishops emeriti who served in vatican city
edwin frederick o'brien, grand master emeritus of the equestrian order of the holy sepulchre of jerusalem
james francis stafford, major penitentiary emeritus of the apostolic penitentiary

bishops serving in vatican diplomatic corps
charles daniel balvo, apostolic nuncio to australia (archdiocese of new york)
michael wallace banach, apostolic nuncio to  hungary (diocese of worcester)
charles john brown, apostolic nuncio to the philippines (archdiocese of new york)
kevin stuart randall, apostolic nuncio to bangladesh (diocese of norwich)
peter brian wells, apostolic nuncio to thailand, cambodia, and laos (diocese of tulsa)

bishops emeriti who served in vatican diplomatic corps
edward joseph adams, apostolic nuncio emeritus to great britain (archdiocese of philadelphia)
michael a. blume, s.v.d., apostolic nuncio emeritus to hungary (chicago province of the society of the divine word)
james green, apostolic nuncio emeritus to iceland, sweden, denmark, finland, and norway (archdiocese of philadelphia)
thomas edward gullickson, apostolic nuncio emeritus to switzerland and liechtenstein (diocese of sioux falls)
joseph marino, president of the pontifical ecclesiastical academy (diocese of birmingham)

bishops serving in foreign sees
christopher cardone, o.p., archbishop of honiara (solomon islands)
arthur colgan, c.s.c., auxiliary bishop of chosica (peru)
robert herman flock, bishop of san ignacio de velasco (bolivia)

bishop emeritus who served in a foreign see
gordon bennett, s.j., bishop emeritus of mandeville (jamaica)

non-american bishops serving in the united states
christophe pierre, apostolic nuncio to the u.s. (nunciature of the holy see in washington, d.c.)
gabriele giordano caccia, permanent observer of the holy see to the united nations
italo dell'oro, auxiliary bishop of the archdiocese of galveston-houston

see also
footnotes
resources
"list of bishops". united states conference of catholic bishops.
"gcatholic bishops".