a concept car (also known as a concept vehicle, show vehicle or prototype) is a car made to showcase new styling and/or new technology. they are often exhibited at motor shows to gauge customer reaction to new and radical designs which may or may not be mass-produced. general motors designer harley earl is generally credited with inventing the concept car, and did much to popularize it through its traveling motorama shows of the 1950s.
concept cars never go into production directly. in modern times all would have to undergo many changes before the design is finalized for the sake of practicality, safety, regulatory compliance, and cost. a "production-intent" prototype, as opposed to a concept vehicle, serves this purpose.

design
concept cars are often radical in engine or design. some use non-traditional, exotic, or expensive materials, ranging from paper to carbon fiber to refined alloys. others have unique layouts, such as gullwing doors, 3 or 5 (or more) wheels, or special abilities not usually found on cars. because of these often impractical or unprofitable leanings, many concept cars never get past scale models or even drawings in computer design. other more traditional concepts can be developed into fully drivable (operational) vehicles with a working drivetrain and accessories. the state of most concept cars lies somewhere in between and does not represent the final product. a very small proportion of concept cars are functional to any useful extent, some cannot move safely at speeds above 10 miles per hour (16 km/h).inoperative "mock-ups" are usually made of wax, clay, metal, fiberglass, plastic or a combination thereof.
if drivable, the drivetrain is often borrowed from a production vehicle from the same company or may have defects and imperfections in design. they can also be quite refined, such as general motors' cadillac sixteen concept.after a concept car's useful life is over, the cars are usually destroyed. some survive, however, either in a company's museum or hidden away in storage. one unused but operational concept car that languished for years in the north hollywood, california, shop of car customizer george barris, ford motor company's "lincoln futura" from 1954, received a new lease on life as the batmobile in the batman series that debuted in 1966 on the abc television network.

notable concept cars
see also
auto show
car design
concept art
pre-production car
production vehicle
product lifecycle management
proof-of-concept
prototype
serial production
show car

references
work cited
kosner, anthony wing (february 22, 2013). "the sports car, the laptop and the science behind the golden proportion". forbes.
manoukian, julia. "the psychology of luxury car buyers: 7 considerations". limelight.
"the greatest ever porsche art cars". porsche.
"this ferrari monza sp1 is world's most beautiful car, according to science - maxim". maxim. march 12, 2021.
"the list of the most beautiful cars in history according to science". ce noticias financieras. march 15, 2021. proquest 2501840615.

external links

concept cars at howstuffworks
old concept cars
concept cars & car design information
information on over 250 concept cars
comparison of concept car and production version
concept cars index
car concepts
concept car
concept cars at www.allcarindex.com - the index of concept cars is dedicated to the showcars and concept automobiles